  
Full 
Monthly Medication
 
Audit             
                                                                                                                                       
Name of Home
Date of Audit
Completed by
Actions added to 
audit action plan
Overall score of Audit
   
Rag Rating
Scoring 
90% 
and above = GREEN
75% - 89% = 
A
MBER
0% - 75% = RED
To score 
– YES and N/A = 1 No – 0
Calculate the number of Yes and N/A answers and divide by the 
54
 then multiply
 by 100 – this will give you an overall % of compliance. 
      
Audit to be completed every 
Month 
by the
 Manager / Deputy /
Care Team Leader 
of 
ALL residents
. 
Ordering and Receiving Medicine
Standard
Yes
No
N/A
Notes
 / Guidance
Comments / Findings
Does the home have specific guidance for ordering medications ‘out of hours’
Ask staff how they order out of hours medicine
Are there contact details for the out of hours pharmacy available
Are newly dispensed medicines checked against the list of what was requested (the order) and the medicines administration record
s
?
Check against 
both new and old MAR charts
Check there is sufficient stock to last the cycle
Are dispensed medicines that are received into the home correctly recorded on the new MAR chart and signed in
 by two staff members
?
 
Observe 
ALL 
of MAR chart
s
 – 
record 
names of residents checked in comments box.
Are balances of remaining stock of current medicines carried forward onto the new MAR chart correctly?
Observe 
ALL
 of MAR chart – 
record 
names of residents checked. (Usually PRNs, creams, inhalers, injectables carried forward)
Are all medications received clearly labelled with 
residents
 name, name of drug, dose, form and instructions for use?
All medicines must be individually labelled for the resident. Medication such as creams that come in an outer box should also be labelled e.g. on the box and on the tube of cream
Are the MARs printed and legible 
and hand typed
 entries are signed by two staff members?
Pharmacy is providing clearly printed MARs
. If hand typed ensure that MAR Charts are fully completed
Score
   /
 
6
Storage
Standard
Yes
No
N/A
Notes / Guidance
Comments
Are all medicines stored safely and in line with current legislation and guidance? 
Is the treatment room locked when not in use and the medication trolley locked and secure?
Secure storage includes:
Locked treatment room
Locked medicine trolley (tethered to the 
wall(
Locked Medication cupboards
Locked medication fridge
Controlled Drugs cupboard that conforms to the Misuse of Drugs (Safe Custody) Regulations 1973
Are medicines for internal and external use stored separately?
Complete a visual check of the cupboards.
Are medication fridges and treatment room temperatures taken
 twice
 daily and there is evidence of action taken where temperatures are found out of range?
Room temperatures between 16
°
C - 25
°C
Fridge temperatures between 2°C - 8°C
Are the staff aware of which medication needs to be stored in the medication fridge before use and when in use?
Ask 2 staff to explain how they store medicine that require refrigeration. 
Check the medication fridge and trolley for correct storage.
Commonly used medication include: 
Refrigeration before use – Insulin 
Refrigeration before and when in use includes – 
Daktacort
 cream / 
Chloramphenicol eye drops/ some antibiotics syrups
Are the medication keys 
kept securely by the designated person and the treatment room is only accessed by 
designated 
staff members
 who
 have the proper authorisation?
Check the medication keys are kept separately from the master keys.
Designated people
.
Do all medications 
have a date opened annotated on the box / bottle and are all within date? 
Commonly used 
short term 
medications include:
I
nsulin – 28 days
Eye drops – 28 days
Tubes / pumps of cream – 12 weeks
Tubs of cream – 28 days
Score
/
 6
Administration of Medicine
Standard
Yes
No
N/A
Notes/Guidance
Comments / Findings
Is there a complete signature list at the front of the MARs folder
All designated staff with medication responsibilities are to sign and initial the 
signature list
Check that agency staff with medication responsibilities have signed the list
Do all residents have a fully populated MARs Profile Sheet
Front sheet includes:
Up to date photograph taken within the last 12 months and is a good likeness of the resident
Allergies consistent with the MARs
Any swallowing difficulties
How the resident prefers to take their medication
Specialist administration details such as: Covert administration
Do all MARs include 
the allergy status of the resident 
or scribed as none known?
Allergies are to be identified on 
hand typed 
and printed MARs
Do all MARs clearly identify what time medication is to be administered
, especially those that are to be administered at specific times
?
Check times are annotated for medication such as: 
Alendronic Acid
Parkinson’s Medication such as 
Madopar
Insulin
Refer to 
Policy  –
 Administration of Medication
Are medications administered using the correct procedures?
Observe medication administration to three residents – did the staff member do the following:
Right person
Right medication
Right dose
Right route
Right time
Right to refuse
Resident was observed taking medication before the MARs was signed
Is the medication trolley equipped properly before the round commences, is equipment such as pill counters / pill 
crushers clean and ready to use?
Check the trolley to make sure there are 
sufficient numbers of
 pill 
pots
 and all necessary equipment is clean and contains no debris from previous use
Does the staff member wear a Do Not Disturb tabard or has in place a process to ensure the round is not disturbed unless there is an emergency. 
Does the staff member conducting the round make sure the trolley is always locked when not in use
Is all non-administration of medication correctly recorded?
Check the following:
Correct code used on MARs
Entry made 
in 
care notes (reverse of MAR)
Entry made in care records
 (daily life records) 
What actions have been taken if the resident has not taken their medication for several days – has the GP been informed etc
With the exception of
 PRNs have the MARs been fully completed with no gaps? 
Check the MARs for 
ALL
 of
 the resident population
Do all MARs entries for Variable dose medication show the exact dose administered?
Is there 
a 
PRN protocol in place that is person-centred and gives clear instruction as to when the PRNs are to be offered / administered?
Where 
is medicine
 administered covertly 
is the correct documentation in place to support this? 
 
Check the following is in place:
Protocol in place that is person-centred and identifies each medication to be administered covertly
Medication front sheet identifies medication is to be administered covertly
Decision specific MCA / Best Interest Meeting /Potential reporting to 
DoLS
Pharmacy guidance on how to administer the medication e.g. crushed in hot or cold food or drink etc
Input from GP as medication may be administered ‘off licence’ e.g. crushed
Check there is a care plan in place that supports covert administration of medicine. 
Refer to – Covert Medication Policy
Are all 
h
andtyped
 entries written clearly with full instructions and countersigned by another staff member who has medication responsibilities?
If a change in dose or instruction is given the old entry must be discontinued and the new in
st
ruction added and countersigned.
All amendments such as: 
Course completed
Medication discontinued
Changes to the time of administration
Must be doubly signed
 
Is there evidence on the MAR that 
weekly
 stock checks are maintained and the balances are correct?
 
Do all stock balances checked for the residents audited match the balance identified on the MAR – check 
All 
of residents. Include the stocks that are kept
:
In the medication stock cupboards / CD cupboard
In the medi
cation
 fridge
In the 
resident’s
 bedroom
In the medicine trolley
Record the initials of residents checked in comments / Findings box
.
Residential 
There is evidence on the MARs 
of medication administration by external healthcare professionals?
If other healthcare professionals come in to administer e.g. insulin, denosumab, vitamin B12 injections, antipsychotic depot injections
 etc this is recorded in the 
residents
 care records or on the MARs. 
Score                          
      /
 1
4
Specialist Administrations
Standard
Yes
No 
N/A
Notes / Guidance
Comments / Findings
Are all residents who self-administer their medication 
are 
assessed as competent to do so? 
Check there is a Self-Administering Assessment in place that has been signed by the GP. 
Check the resident has a lockable storage facility e.g. drawer in place.
The MARs clearly 
identifies
 the medication that the resident can self-administer. 
Check the staff have a system in place to monitor the resident e.g. weekly stock checks with the 
residents
 consent. 
Check a 
resident
s
 
who are 
prescribed Warfarin, is there all necessary documentation in place to support safe administration?
Check there is a copy of the most recent MAR, make sure the next blood test is not overdue, (this could be in the form of the ‘Yellow’ book or on official paperwork from the anticoagulation clinic)
The actual dose given is documented on the MARs – not the number of tablets given
Check the warfarin monitoring chart is being used
Refer to 
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/high-risk-medicines-anticoagulants
 for further guidance where necessary
Check 
all residents 
who 
are
 prescribed Insulin, is all necessary documentation in place to support safe administration?
 
Check the Blood Sugar Monitoring Chart – are the tests being completed in accordance with the care plan. 
Check the blood sugars are maintained within the identified acceptable limits and action taken when the levels are out of range. 
Does the MAR chart clearly identify the dosage in UNITs and does not use abbreviations such as U or IU.
Check that safe sharps are being used e.g. lancets and needles
Check that the 
CTL
 take the sharps box to the resident to ensure safe disposal
Record 
initials of resident checked in comments/ findings section
Check  
residents
 who
 
uses
 Oxygen, is this being administered safely?
Check that there is appropriate signage in place and that the cylinders are being stored safely. 
Cylinders should be stored upright and attached to the wall, or stored in a trolley that is specifically designed for that use. 
The
 should be stored in an area that is clean, dry and not exposed to any extremes of heat. 
Check the resident has a care plan that directs how the oxygen is to be used such as flow rate, equipment required such as nasal cannula or face mask. 
Put initial of resident checked in comments/ findings section
Is there evidence that the application sites for transdermal patches, insulin etc are being rotated?
Check the insulin recording charts / patch recording charts are completed appropriately to demonstrate safe application
Record
 the initial of resident checked in comments/findings section
Is there evidence to show that medications given at varying intervals are being administered in accordance with information on the FP10 (prescription)?
Check records for residents receiving medications such as: 
Vitamin B12 
Alendronic Acid (Weekly)
Fentanyl Patch (72 hours)
Butrans
 Patch (every 7 days)
Depot injections (monthly etc)
Check the MAR is scored out 
to guide when administration of the medication is due
Put initials of residents checked in comments/findings section
Are anticipatory (just in case) medications safely managed?
Check there is an anticipatory protocol in place that is person-centred and details how, when and why these are to be 
administered..
 
Where rescue remedies have been prescribed check the directions for use are clearly documented on the MARs and the associated care plan.
Where medication is prescribed that requires specialist administration, are staff fully trained and competent?
This relates to medication such as:
Syringe Drivers
Subcutaneous and Intramuscular administration
Buccal Midazolam or rectal diazepam
Score 
    /
8
Record 
Keeping 
 /
 Training / policies
Standard
Yes
No
N/A
Notes / Guidance 
Comments / 
Findngs
Staff know how to access the medication policies?
Ask two staff with medication responsibilities where the policies are kept and how they utilise them when required?
All sharps’ boxes are dated when assembled and when closed
All staff with medication responsibilities have undergone their training and are up to date with their competency checks?
Check that staff who medicate residents have undergone a minimum annual medication competency. 
Is there an 
up to date
 BNF available in the medication 
room
? 
BNF must be dated within 12 months
 – request an 
up to date
 BNF from your pharmacy supplier where necessary
 
Is there evidence that all medication errors have been 
fully investigated and 
reported internally and externally (where appropriate) to Regulators, Safeguarding et
c 
Medication incident examples below:
Medication administered to the wrong resident
Residents administered medication that they are allergic to
Wrong dosage administered
Out of stock 
Errors relating to pharmacy / GP / DN etc
NB this is not an exhaustive list
Check there is evidence of lessons learned where appropriate. 
Where 
appropriate Transfers of Care have
 taken place effectively?
Transfer of care includes new admissions to the home, or transfer and readmission from hospital.
Check a new 
admission:
 w
ere
 sufficient stocks of medication received, did 2 staff sign the hand 
typed 
MARs. 
Check a full discharge summary was received from the hospital that detailed medications. 
Are Topical Medications administered safely with all supporting documentation in place. 
Check 
completion of topical MAR charts and body maps.
If topical medication is kept in the 
residents
 room check these are stored safely.
Check the topical is annotated with the date opened and that the resident is not using another 
residents
 medication
If 
HCA’s
 are administering 
topicals
 have they been trained and deemed competent to do so.
Are Controlled medication
s
 stored 
appropriately
 
with 
robust records maintained?
Check the controlled drug register is maintained correctly:
The register is completed by two staff members
The register contains records of receipt, administration and disposal
Any errors have one line scribed through with a full explanation 
All entries are written in black ink
kits are used to dispose of the medication
Ask two members of staff how they use the denaturing kits and how they dispose of CD patches such as Fentanyl
In Residential homes the pharmacy returns book is completed for medication that is no longer required
Are Controlled medications administered safely?
Where possible observe a CD administration to make sure two staff members complete the register, one staff member administers the medication and the second staff member acts as a witness
.
Check staff understanding of those medications that do not legally require safe custody and records E.g. Gabapentin, pregabalin, tramadol, zopiclone, lorazepam but should be denatured in a DOOP kit.
Is there evidence that minimum weekly stock checks are carried out on Controlled Drugs?
 
Check the CD register and complete a stock check to confirm the balances are correct
.
Make sure the CD checks have been carried out by two staff who have medication responsibilities
Refer – Controlled Drugs Policy
Is there evidence that Homely Remedies (where used) are managed in line with policy? 
Homely remedies should undergo a minimum monthly check. 
Check the opening dates of any liquid medication
 to make sure it is in date
Check the homely remedies are in accordance with the agree formulary
Where residents have required homely remedies for 2 consecutive days 
the
 have been referred to the GP
Check homely remedies have been purchased from the pharmacy
Check that any homely remedies administered are recorded on the MARs and in daily records. 
Score 
        /
 1
1
Dementia and Wellbeing
Standard
Yes
No 
N/A
Where residents are prescribed medications that are to be administered on a bi-monthly or 3 is this managed effectively?
Medications 
include;
 Lithium, Clozapine, leflunomide. Check that there is a process in place to manage the regular blood tests. 
https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/high-risk-medicines-lithium
Check the MARs are correctly scribed for monthly / three monthly depot injections to make sure a dose 
is  not
 missed.
Where residents are prescribed specific dementia medication such as: 
Cholinesterase inhibitors - 
AChEi
 
is there evidence in place that these have been prescribed 
by a Consultant Psychiatrist & reviewed 
minimum yearly or when required
 by GP
Refer to the following for further guidance where required:
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta217/chapter/1-guidance
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/dementia/treatment/
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/about-dementia/treatments/drugs/drug-treatments-alzheimers-disease
Where residents have been prescribed more than one anti-psychotic medication such as 
( e.g.
 Risperidone, Olanzapine, Quetiapine)
 is there evidence that these have been reviewed 
minimum yearly or when required by GP
Refer to the following links for further guidance:
https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/ktt7/resources/lowdose-antipsychotics-in-people-with-dementia-1632175200709#:~:text=A%20person%20living%20with%20dementia,try%20to%20help%20their%20distress
Where residents have been prescribed MAOI`s - Monoamine oxidase B inhibitors (for example, selegiline and rasagiline
)?,
 is there reference in their Nutritional care plan of foods to avoid?
Consider the following guidance:
https://bnf.nice.org.uk/drug-class/monoamine-oxidase-inhibitors.html
Have residents been reviewed by the GP
 minimum 12 months or as and when required
?
Has there been involvement & review with a 
Consultant
 psychiatrist?
file:///C:/Users/Julie/Downloads/depression-antidepressant-treatment-in-adults.pdf
Where residents are living with Dementia and have been prescribed sleeping tablets (Hypnotics) and an antipsychotic / Melatonin has the GP 
reviewed in the last 12 months or as and when required
?
Consider the following guidance:
https://www.nice.org.uk/advice/ktt6/chapter/Evidence-context
Score 
       /
 5
Di
sposal of Medi
c
ation
Standard
Yes 
No
N/A
Is there evidence that medication that is no longer required, or have not been administered are disposed of safely?
 
Discontinued or medication not administered are disposed of immediately. A record of all disposed of medication is kept and copies of waste consignment notes are kept in the home. 
For residential homes waste medication is returned to the pharmacy and a record kept. 
Check the waste medication is stored safely in a tamper proof container until collection. 
Do records include name of resident, date of disposal, name, strength and quantity of medicines, reasons for disposal, and signature of staff recording the waste
?
Are medications for deceased residents kept for a minimum of 7 days after death
 
or retained safely 
where
 instructed by the 
Coroner
 in case of investigation?
Medication for deceased residents are stored safely in a container or bag that identifies the medicine is being held for 7 days. 
Are medications consigned to waste appropriately disposed of?
Check all medications that could be carried forwards have not been consigned to waste at the beginning of the new cycle. 
Check that the staff are ordering medications appropriately and are not overstocking; 
Score 
    /
 3
Miscellaneous
Standard
Yes
No 
N/A
Have all actions identified at the last audit been completed?
Score 
        /
 1
Scoring 
Standard 
Possible Score 
Actual Score 
Percentage
Ordering and Receipt of medicine
6
Storage of medicine
6
Administration of medicine
1
4
Specialist Administration
8
Record Keeping
1
1
Dementia and Wellbeing
5
Disposal
 
of
 Medication
3
Miscellaneous
1
Total score
54
Actions required following audit
:
Have all actions been added to the Continuous Improvement Plan?    
Yes
No 
Signature: 
Audit Completed by: 
Position
Signature
Date
